U.S. World Science Culture Autos Rankings Health Life Opinion Experts Better Planet SUBSCRIBE FOR $1 Login × SUBSCRIBE FOR $1 Login U.S. World Science Culture Autos Rankings Health Life Opinion Experts Better Planet Beauty & Fashion Business Education Fact Check Mightier My Turn Tech Sports Sports Betting Podcasts Newsletters Unconventional Vantage Pet of the Week Pets Dogs Animals Cats Sleep Family Rescue Dog With Adorable Habit to Fall Asleep Wins Pet of the Week Nov 04, 2023 at 7:30 AM EDT AD Loading ... By Alice Gibbs Senior Internet Culture & Trends Reporter FOLLOW 0 From a dog's hilarious way of going outside to the bathroom to an owner sharing how their "lover and hater" dogs co-exist, we've seen some great viral pets this week. We've also had some great submissions from readers for our Newsweek Pet of the Week. If you want your pet to be part of next week's line-up, follow the instructions at the end of this article to find out how. Winner Petie, a 6-year-old rescue dog who lives with owner Amy Maros in Georgia. AMY MAROS This week our Newsweek Pet of the Week winner is Petie, a 6-year-old rescue dog who lives with owner Amy Maros in Georgia. NEWSLETTER The Bulletin Your daily briefing of everything you need to know "I have no idea what breed he is since he was rescued at only 4 weeks," Maros told Newsweek. "But I'm pretty sure he has some bird dog in him and maybe a little lab." The adorable pup has a fairly unusual habit—he likes to suckle on blankets at night in order to fall asleep. "As soon as it is bedtime, he will stretch himself across my chest and take a corner of the blanket and suckle on it until he falls asleep," Maros explained. Maros believes she knows where this habit comes from too. "At 4 weeks old I had to bottle feed him," she said. "To this day he still suckles on a blanket every night, mimicking his bottle." In the daytime, he loves playing with toys and swimming in the pool. As a picky eater, he only likes to eat healthy and organic meals. But Maros' favorite thing about him is his loving nature. SIGN UP FOR NEWSWEEK’S DAILY HEADLINES "He loves to snuggle," she said. "And when he gets irritated at my husband for pestering him when he's trying to snuggle with me." Finalists Kittens Hope and Faith who are also twins. Living in Tampa, Florida, with their owner Pam Hayes, the two have been inseparable since they were born. PAM HAYES We couldn't pick just one pet to feature, of course, and this week our first finalists are twin kittens Hope and Faith. Living in Tampa, Florida, with their owner Pam Hayes, the two have been inseparable since they were born. "When they arrived at 3 months and 3 pounds a piece, they were closed off behind a gate," Hayes told Newsweek. "Now at 11 pounds each, they hop over the gate if they want to." Bundles of energy, the pair are often cuddling one minute and tussling and pouncing the next. "They love anything that has a ball in it that they can bat around. They also like chasing the red dot of a laser light. They are still learning what to do with that," Hayes said. "It has also been fun watching them warm up to their older brother, Spirit, an 8-year-old dog." Parker, a foxhound who lives in Pennsylvania with owner Dennis J. Holbrook. DENNIS J. HOLBROOK Next up this week is Parker, a 7-year-old foxhound who lives with owner Dennis J. Holbrook in Parkesburg, Pennsylvania. "I love him like my own son and daughter," Holbrook told Newsweek. "I love animals and Parker lives with 6 cats here at home." Two years ago, Holbrook sadly lost his wife of 53 years and explained that now his animals give him great comfort and love. "Parker and his cat friends are my family now," he said. "Please world, adopt shelter animals." Roscoe and Lucy relaxing together on the couch. Owner Nancy Popick told Newsweek they both enjoy long naps. NANCY POPICK And last, but not least, is canine duo Roscoe and Lucy who live with their owner Nancy Popick in Craig, Colorado. Papillion Roscoe is 14 years old, while dachshund Lucy is seven. "They both enjoy taking long naps, going for a ride in the car and going on walks," Popick told Newsweek. "Lucy especially loves to eat." Do you have funny and adorable videos or pictures of your pet you want to share? Send them to life@newsweek.com with some details about your best friend and they could appear in our Pet of the Week lineup. Request Reprint & Licensing Submit Correction View Editorial Guidelines About the writer Alice Gibbs FOLLOW Alice Gibbs is a Newsweek Senior Internet Trends & Culture Reporter based in the U.K. For the last two years... read more To read how Newsweek uses AI as a newsroom tool, click here. Trending 01 Viral Photos Appear To Show Empty Seats at Donald Trump's Florida Speech 120 comments 02 The Video That Could Convict Tupac's Alleged Murderer 4 comments 03 'Unique' Cosmic Light Show to Fill Skies Across the Globe This Weekend 22 comments 04 Alabama Pastor 'Outed' by Right-Wing Website Kills Himself 39 comments 05 Children's Food Recall After Kids Suffer 'Potential Acute Lead Toxicity' 7 comments To Homepage THE DEBATE Are We Really Ready To Live in a World Without the U.N.? By Rodrigo Aguilar Benignos VS Rep. Luna: It's Time to Defund the U.N. Here's Where to Start By Anna Paulina Luna OPINION Why Mourning Former Premier Li Keqiang Is Forbidden in China By Yaqiu Wang Are We Really Ready To Live in a World Without the U.N.? By Rodrigo Aguilar Benignos America Must Support Israel in Her Time of Need By Sheila Cherfilus-mccormick Fifteen Years Later—Justice for a Sacred Site By Carol Logan Want a Ceasefire? Tell Hamas To Free All Hostages and Surrender. By Josh Hammer Religious Liberty Stops Violence By Jeremy Dys And Yaakov Menken A Dark Winter Is Coming for Ukraine By Daniel R. Depetris Are Progressives in Favor of an Islamist Theocracy, Or Just Ignorant? By Dan Perry Even After the War in Gaza, Israel Will Have to Hunt Down Hamas' Leaders By Yaakov Katz One Thing Congress Can Do to Help Working Families Today By Suzanne Mccormick Winning the Irregular World War By Alexander Noyes And Daniel Egel Guess Who's Paying for Big Oil's Latest Merger? You By Jacob Stump Premium Subscription Digital + Monthly (Ad Free Trial) Newsweek magazine delivered to your door Unlimited access to Newsweek.com Ad free Newsweek.com experience iOS and Android app access All newsletters + podcasts SUBSCRIBE NOW Top Stories Ohio Could Reset The Abortion Debate Zelensky Shuts Down His Own Commander's War Comments Videos Show Massive Pro-Palestinian Protests in D.C., London, and Paris Backlash in the US: Headstones Vandalized With Swastikas, Racial Slurs in Illinois U.S. World Science Culture Autos Rankings Health Opinion Experts Better Planet Beauty & Fashion Business Education Fact Check Mightier My Turn Tech Sports Sports Betting Podcasts Newsletters Unconventional Vantage Trending Israel at War Vladimir Putin Russia-Ukraine War Donald Trump Subscriptions Digital+ Monthly (Ad Free Trial) $1.00 Digital+ Yearly $49.00 Premium Monthly $9.99 Premium Yearly $99 In The Magazine November 10 2023 Issue Newsletters in your inbox  See all The Bulletin (Mondays to Saturdays) See Sample The Cover (Wednesdays) See Sample The Josh Hammer Report (Wednesdays) See Sample The Frontlines (Thursdays) See Sample Israel at War (Mondays to Fridays) For The Culture (Tuesdays and Thursdays) See Sample Pawsitively (Mondays to Fridays) Better Planet (Mondays) The Debate (Tuesdays) Mightier (Coming soon) Sign up now You can unsubscribe at any time. By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy Company About Us Masthead Diversity Announcements Archive Policies and Standards Mission Statement Leadership Newsletters Press Center Editions: U.S. Edition 日本 Polska România Contact Advertise Careers Contact Us Corrections Terms of Use Cookie Policy Copyright Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Terms of Sale © 2023 NEWSWEEK DIGITAL LLC
